वैकुण्ठ वर्धितबलोऽथ भवत्प्रसादा-
दम्भोजयोनिरसृजत् किल जीवदेहान् ।
स्थास्नूनि भूरुहमयानि तथा तिरश्चां
जातिं मनुष्यनिवहानपि देवभेदान् ॥१॥
वैकुण्ठ	O Lord of Vaikuntha loka !
वर्धित-बल: -अथ	(Brahmaa) whose strength had enhanced then
भवत्-प्रसादात्-	by Thy grace
अम्भोज्योनि: -	the lotus born (Brahmaa)
असृजत् किल	created it is said
जीवदेहान्	bodies for jeevas
स्थानूनि	the non-moving entities (trees etc.)
भूरुहमयानि	which grow on the earth
तथा तिरश्चां जातिं	and animals, birds etc.
मनुष्य-निवहान्-अपि	and also human kind
देवभेदान्	and various divine beings
O Lord of Vaikuntha! by Thy grace, with increased spiritual powers, Brahmaa started creation. He created varieties of beings, those that grow on earth and are non-moving like trees etc., as well as the moving, like animals birds etc., human beings and various divine beings. These serve as bodies for the jeevas to enter into.
मिथ्याग्रहास्मिमतिरागविकोपभीति-
रज्ञानवृत्तिमिति पञ्चविधां स सृष्ट्वा ।
उद्दामतामसपदार्थविधानदून -
स्तेने त्वदीयचरणस्मरणं विशुद्ध्यै ॥२॥
मिथ्या-आग्रह-	false apprehension
अस्मिमति-राग-	egoism, attachment
विकोप-भीति:-	anger and fear
अज्ञानवृत्तिम्-इति	effects of ignorance, these
पञ्चविधां	of five kinds
स सृष्ट्वा	Brahmaa having created
उद्दाम-तामस-पदार्थ-विधान्-अदून:-	and repenting for having created these extremely taamasic qualities
तेने	resorted to
त्वदीय-चरण-स्मरणं	on Thy lotus feet contemplation
विशुद्ध्यै	for self purification
Brahma then created the five-fold effects of ignorance,which are wrong apprehension, egoism, attachment, anger and fear. Having created these extremely negative qualities and repenting for doing so, he resorted to meditate on Thy lotus feet for self purification.
तावत् ससर्ज मनसा सनकं सनन्दं
भूय: सनातनमुनिं च सनत्कुमारम् ।
ते सृष्टिकर्मणि तु तेन नियुज्यमाना-
स्त्वत्पादभक्तिरसिका जगृहुर्न वाणीम् ॥३॥
तावत् ससर्ज मनसा	then he created from his mind
सनकं सनन्दं	(sages) Sanaka, Sananda
भूय: सनातनमुनिं च सनत्कुमारं	also Sanaatana Muni and Sanat kumara
ते सृष्टिकर्मणि तु	they , in the job of creation
तेन नियुज्यमाना: -	by Brahmaa, though asked to engage
त्वत्-पाद-भक्ति-रसिका	(these sages) who were immersed in devotion to Thy feet
जगृहु: -न वाणीम्	did not heed (his) words
Brahmaa then from his mind created Sanaka, Sananda, Sanaatana Muni and Sanat Kumaras.Even though they were directed by Brahmaa to engage in the work of creation, they did not heed his words because they were highly devoted to Thy feet.
तावत् प्रकोपमुदितं प्रतिरुन्धतोऽस्य
भ्रूमध्यतोऽजनि मृडो भवदेकदेश: ।
नामानि मे कुरु पदानि च हा विरिञ्चे-
त्यादौ रुरोद किल तेन स रुद्रनामा ॥४॥
तावत्	then
प्रकोपम्-उदितं	the anger which arose in him
प्रतिरुन्धत: -	and who was suppressing it
अस्य भ्रूमध्यत: -	from his (Brahmaa's) middle of the eyebrows
अजनि मृड:	was born Mrida
भवत्-एक-देश:	who was a part incarnation of Thine
नामानि मे कुरु	provide me with names
पदानि च	and abodes
हा विरिञ्च-	O Brahmaa
इति-आदौ रुरोद	thus at once he cried out
किल तेन स रुद्रनामा	because of that he came to be known as Rudra
A great anger arose in Brahma, because he was refused his bidding by his mental sons, which he tried to suppress. This caused the birth of Mrida from between his eyebrows, who is a part incarnation of Thine. Mrida at once cried out and told Brahmaa to provide him with names and abodes. Thus Mrida came to be known as Rudra.
एकादशाह्वयतया च विभिन्नरूपं
रुद्रं विधाय दयिता वनिताश्च दत्वा ।
तावन्त्यदत्त च पदानि भवत्प्रणुन्न:
प्राह प्रजाविरचनाय च सादरं तम् ॥५॥
एकादश-आह्वयतया	with eleven names
च विभिन्न-रूपं	and different forms
रुद्रं विधाय	to Rudra giving
दयिता: वनिता: -च दत्वा	and also giving eleven dear wives
तावन्ति-अदत्त च पदानि	and as many abodes were also given
भवत्-प्रणुन्न:	(then) impelled by Thee
प्राह प्रजा-विरचनाय	(Brahmaa) requested for the creation of beings
च सादरं तम्	to him (Rudra) humbly
Brahmaa then prompted by Thee, gave Rudra eleven names, forms, abodes and as many wives and humbly requested him to help in the creative process.
रुद्राभिसृष्टभयदाकृतिरुद्रसंघ-
सम्पूर्यमाणभुवनत्रयभीतचेता: ।
मा मा प्रजा: सृज तपश्चर मङ्गलाये-
त्याचष्ट तं कमलभूर्भवदीरितात्मा ॥६॥
रुद्र-अभिसृष्ट-	Rudra's creation
भयद-आकृति-रुद्रसंघ-	(consisting) of fierce looking hosts of Rudraas
सम्पूर्यमाण-भुवनत्रय-	filling up the three worlds
भीत-चेता:	and getting frightened by them
मा मा प्रजा: सृज	(Brahmaa said) do not, do not procreate any more beings
तप: -चर	do penance
मङ्ग्लाय-	for the welfare (of the world)
इति-आचष्ट तं कमलभू: -	thus said the lotus born Brahmaa to him
भवत-ईरितात्मा	by Thee being prompted from within
Rudraa's creation consisted of fierce looking Rudras,which were filling up the three worlds. Brahmaa was frightened by them, and from within being prompted by Thee, told Rudra not to create any more beings, and asked him to do penance for the benefit of the world.
तस्याथ सर्गरसिकस्य मरीचिरत्रि-
स्तत्राङिगरा: क्रतुमुनि: पुलह: पुलस्त्य: ।
अङ्गादजायत भृगुश्च वसिष्ठदक्षौ
श्रीनारदश्च भगवन् भवदंघ्रिदास: ॥७॥
तस्य-अथ	thereafter, from him (Brahmaa)
सर्ग-रसिकस्य	who was intent on creation
मरीचि: -अत्रि: -	Mareechi, Atri
तत्र-अङिगरा:	and also Angiraas
क्रतुमुनि: पुलह: पुलस्त्य:	Kratumuni, Pulaha, Pulastya
अङ्गात्-अजायत	from his body were born
भृगु:-च वसिष्ठ-दक्षौ	also Bhrigu, Vasishtha and Dakshas
श्री-नारद: -च	and Shri Naarada
भगवन्	O Lord!
भवत्-अंघ्रि-दास:	who is devoted to Thy lotus feet
Brahmaa, who was intent on creation, from his own body created (the sages) Mareechi, Atri, Angiraas, Kratumuni, Pulaha, Pulastya, Bhrigu, Vasishtha, the Dakshas and also Shri Naarada, who is a devotee of Thy lotus feet.
धर्मादिकानभिसृजन्नथ कर्दमं च
वाणीं विधाय विधिरङ्गजसंकुलोऽभूत् ।
त्वद्बोधितैस्सनकदक्षमुखैस्तनूजै-
रुद्बोधितश्च विरराम तमो विमुञ्चन् ॥८॥
धर्म-आदिकान्-अभिसृजन्-	Dharmadevas and others having created
अथ कर्दमं च	and also Kardama
वाणीं विधाय	then after creating Saraswati
विधि: -	Brahmaa
अङ्गज-संकुल: -अभूत्	was afflicted by desire
त्वत्-बोधितै: -	(then) prompted by Thee
सनक-दक्ष-मुखै: -	by Sanaka, Daksha and others
तनूजै:-उद्बोधित: -च	by his own sons enlightened
विरराम	refrained
तम: विमुञ्चन्	and gave up ignorance
Brahmaa further created Dharmadeva, sage Kardama and then Saraswati. He was then overcome with desire for her, his own creation. However, prompted by Thee, Sanaka Daksha and his other sons enlightened him and he gave up desire, being disillusioned.
वेदान् पुराणनिवहानपि सर्वविद्या:
कुर्वन् निजाननगणाच्चतुराननोऽसौ ।
पुत्रेषु तेषु विनिधाय स सर्गवृद्धि-
मप्राप्नुवंस्तव पदाम्बुजमाश्रितोभूत् ॥९॥
वेदान् पुराण-निवहान्-	the Vedas and all the Puraanas
अपि सर्व-विद्या:	also all the other branches of learning
कुर्वन् निज-आनन-गणात्-	bringing out from all his faces
चतु:-आनन-असौ	that four faced (Brahmaa)
पुत्रेषु तेषु विनिधाय	to his those sons having imparted
स सर्ग-वृद्धिम्-अप्राप्नुवन्-	and he unable to further the creation
तव पदाम्बुजम्-आश्रित: - अभूत्	at Thy lotus feet took refuge
Brahmaa then brought out the Vedas and all the Puraanas and all the other branches of learning, from his four faces and taught them to his sons. He then found himself unable to further the process of creation and so he took refuge at Thy lotus feet.
जानन्नुपायमथ देहमजो विभज्य
स्रीपुंसभावमभजन्मनुतद्वधूभ्याम् ।
ताभ्यां च मानुषकुलानि विवर्धयंस्त्वं
गोविन्द मारुतपुरेश निरुन्धि रोगान् ॥१०॥
जानन्-उपायम्-अथ	knowing the technique then
देहम्-अज: विभज्य	Brahmaa, dividing his body into two
स्त्री-पुंस-भावम्-अभजत्-	assumed the forms of female and male
मनु-तत्-वधूभ्याम्	as Manu and his wife (Shataroopaa)
ताभ्यां च	through them
मानुष-कुलानि विवर्धयन्-	then multiplying the human race
त्वं गोविन्द् मारुतपुरेश	Thou O Govind! Lord of Guruvaayur!
निरुन्धि रोगान्	(kindly) eradicate my ailments
Then prompted by Thee and knowing the technique Brahmaa, from the two sides of his body created the male and the female, named Manu and his wife Shataroopa. Through them he then multiplied the human race. Thou O Govinda! Lord of Guruvaayur! kindly eradicate my ailments.